README.md, before:

# PhylExAnalysis

## Install PhylExR

We provide common functions used for data processing and analysis as an R package `PhylExR`. We recommend to install this package first.
From the command line,
```
R CMD build PhylExR
```
This command should create `PhylExR_1.0.tar.gz` file.
The following command will install the package.
```
R CMD install PhylExR_1.0.tar.gz
```

## Install PhylEx
Install dependencies for [PhylEx](https://github.com/junseonghwan/PhylEx).
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
cd PhylEx
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make install
```

## PhylEx data input format

The bulk data has 5 columns separated by tabs: `ID`, `b`, `d`, `major_cn`, `minor_cn`.
The columns `b` and `d` are integer counts of the number of reads mapping to the variants and the total depth at a loci identified by `ID`.
If the data consists of multiple regions, the columns `b`, `d`, `major_cn`, `minor_cn` should contain the counts separated by comma.

The single cell data contains 4 columns: `ID`, `Cell`, `a`, `d`.
The `ID` column corresponds to the `ID` column in the bulk data file. The `Cell` column identifies the cell name/ID. The column `a` is the number of reads mapping to the reference allele at `ID` for cell `Cell` and `d` is the total number of reads mapping to the loci identified by `ID`.

Finally, there is a file containing the hyperparameters to be used in the inference. This file can be generated usign We recommend to auto-generate this file using the scripts provided (see the subsequent sections for the details).

Example data files accepted by PhylEx are provided in `data/`. See for example, `data/HGSOC_bulk.txt`, `data/HGSOC_sc.txt`, and `data/HGSOC_sc_hp.txt`.

## Real biological data processing

We have provided scripts to help generate the input file and the configuration file needed to run PhylEx in this section.

### Bulk data

Relevant script:
- `Rscripts/PrepareBulkData.R`

We first processes the VCF file to generate the bulk data. An Rscript can be found in `Rscripts/PrepareBulkData.R`. This script accepts three arguments: `VCF_PATH`, `CNV_PATH`, and `OUTPUT_PATH`. The `VCF_PATH` is the path to `.vcf` file generated from a variant caller such as MuTect2. The `CNV_PATH` is to the path containing the outputs of TitanCNA. We will look for the optimal copy number profile selected by TitanCNA in the path `${CNV_PATH}/cna/results/titan/hmm/optimalClusterSolution.txt`.
This script outputs `bulk.txt` and `loci.txt`. 

### scRNA-data

Relevant scripts:
- `scripts/ProcessSingleCells.py`
- `scripts/ExtractReadCounts.sh`
- `scripts/ProcessSingleCellBAM.R`
- `Rscripts/CombineSingleCellData.R`

We assume that scRNA-seq data has been pre-processed, i.e., as alignment and procesing UMI barcodes, and available as one BAM file for each cell. We have an Rscript that takes `loci.txt` and location to the scRNA-seq BAM files to extract the read data (`scripts/ProcessSingleCellBAM.R`). We recommend batch run this R script on all BAM files using `scripts/ProcessSingleCells.py`. Then, use `Rscripts/CombineSingleCellData.R` to generate `sc.txt` and `sc_hp.txt` file.

### Estimating the hyperparameters

Relevant scripts:
- `Rscripts/HGSOCEstimateHyperParams.R`

Generating the bulk and scRNA data files can be done in custom ways as long as it meets the format described above. In such a case, we recommend to generate the hyper parameter file for the single cell data by following the example provided in `Rscripts/HGSOCEstimateHyperParams.R`. 

## Run PhylEx

Relevant scripts:
- `scripts/RunInference.py`
- `scripts/RunInference.sh`

Once the input data are generated, we recommend to use a script to `scripts/RunInference.py` to generate the configuration file needed for running PhylEx.
We recommend to use 4 chains and the number of MCMC iterations should depend on the number of SNVs. 
As a point of reference, we used 20,000 iterations for HER2+ data, which had 432 SNVs and 369 cells and 10,000 iterations for HGSOC data, which had 67 SNVs and 360 cells.

## Anlaysis

A script analyzing the ovarian cancer cell line data is provided in `Rscripts/HGSOC_SS3_Analysis.R`. It uses the expression matrix data deposited on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4533670) `HGSOC_fc.txt.zip`. We recommend to download and uncompress the file under `data/`.

## Reproducibility
The figures and tables presented in [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1) can be reproduced by the following steps.

1. Download the gene expression matrix files `HGSOC_fc.txt.zip` and `HER2_fc.txt.zip`from our [data repository](https://zenodo.org/record/4533670#.YMecUjZKg8Y) on Zenodo. Uncompress the files under `data/` where the input data files for PhylEx should be already available.
2. Download the results files `HGSOC_results.zip` and `HER2_results.zip`. Uncompress the files in `data/`, which should create directories `HGSOC_results` and `HER2_results`. These are the MAP trees outputted by running PhylEx.
    - The results can also be reproduced by running PhylEx by running `RunInference.py` script on the input data available in `data/` (see above). 
3. The phylo-phenotypic analysis for ovarian cancer cell-line data can be reproduced by running `Rscripts/HGSOC_SS3_Analysis.R`. The results for HER2+ cancer can be reproduced by running `Rscripts/HER2_DGE.R`.

## Simulation data generation
The code for simulating the data is provided in the script: `scripts/SimulateData.py`.
The simulation options can be separated into three parts: 1) simulation conditions, 2) bulk data, 3) single cell data.

The simulation conditions are number of cells, number of replicates, tree size and minimum clone fraction:

- `-c`: Number of cells separated by comma. Default: `0,100,200,400`.
- `-r`: Number of replicates. Default: `20`.
- `-b`: Number of branches. Default: `2` for binary tree.
- `-d`: Depth of tree. Default: `3`.
- `-f`: Minimum clone fraction (cellular prevalence). Default: `0.05`.
- `--randomize_cf`: Randomize simulation of cellular fraction. Default: `0` for deterministical generation of cellular fraction where the cell fraction is halved at each node of the parent's remaining cellular fraction.
- `--randomize_branching`: Randomize the number of branches. Default: `0`. Setting this to `1` will randomly select the number of children for each node up to the value specified using `-d`.

The bulk data options control the number of SNVs, number of regions, and copy number simulation:

- `-s`: Number of sites (SNVs). Default: `100`.
- `-R`: Number of regions for simulating multi-regional bulk data. Default: `1` for single region.
- `--bulk_mean_depth`: The depth for the bulk data. Default: `1,000`.
- `-birth_rate`: Birth rate. Default: `0`.
- `-death_rate`: Death rate. Default: `0`.
- `-max_cn`: Maximum (total) copy number. Default: `10`.
- `-variant_cp_prob`: Probability of a copy being a variant. Default: `0.5`.
- `--var_clonal_cn_prob`: An alternative approach to generating copy number profiles. For variant copy number simulation. Default `0,1,0,0` for 1 copy of variant.
- `--ref_clonal_cn_prob`: An alternative approach to generating copy number profiles. For reference copy number simulation. Default `0,1,0,0` for 1 copy of reference copy.

The single cell data options are bursty probability controlling the probability of mono-allelic expression, dropout

- `--bursty_prob`: Probability of mono-allelic expression. Default: `0.8`.
- `--dropout_rate`: Number of sites to drop in the single cell expression. Default `0.8`, 80% of the number of sites will be dropped or 20% will be expressed.
- `--randomize_dropout`: Randomize dropout. The exact dropout rate will be randomly select from the value specified by `--dropout_rate` to `1`. Default: `1`.
- `--sc_mean_depth`: Mean depth for single cell data. Default: `20`.
- `--sc_bursty_alpha`: Hyperparameter $\alpha$ for mono-allelic distribution (Beta distribution). Default: `0.01`.
- `--sc_bursty_beta`: Hyperparameter $\beta$ for mono-allelic distribution (Beta distribution). Default: `0.01`.
- `--beta_binomial_hp_max`: The maximum value to use in quantifying the bi-allelic distribution across sites. Default: `10`.

There are options that relate to both the single cell and bulk data.
- `--snv_sc_sparsity`: The proportion of sites (SNVs) to have single cell coverage, specify a value int he range `[0, 1]`. Default: `1.0`, all sites are candidates to be covered. For a value below `1`, we will randomly select sites to never be expressed in the single cell simulation.
- `--seq_err`: The error probability for bulk data and for the error distribution of the single cell data. Default: `0.01`.

There is an option `--local` if it is specified, it will use the path to the executable under `PhylEx/simul`. If it is not specified, it uses an alternative path; you will need to modify `PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE` in the script to point to the correct path.

### Example

To simulate multifurcating tree with maximum of 4 branches and CN simulation with birth and death rates of `1` and `0.2` to be run locally, the below command can be used:
```
python scripts/SimulateData.py 123 simul/ -b 4 --randomize_branching 1 --birth_rate 1 --death_rate 0.2 --local 
```
The default values are used for the number of replicates (`20`), number of cells (`0,100,200,400`), and etc.

For binary tree,
```
python scripts/SimulateData.py 123 simul/ -b 2 --birth_rate 1 --death_rate 0.2 --local 
```

The simulated data generated using the script and analyzed in [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1) are deposited on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4533670).

### Running PhylEx on simulated data
The script `scripts/RunSimulationStudy.py` contains the code for batch running the simulation studies.
It assumes that there are 20 replicates and 4 cases involving the number of cells. To run simulation study for specific replicates, use the options `--rbegin` and `--rend`. And to run it for specific cases, use `--cbegin` and `--cend`.

The number of MCMC iterations for TSSB and MH iterations for sampling the cellular prevalences can be specified using the options `-m` and `-p`. The thinning and burn in can be controlled using `-t` and `-u`. The option `--nchains` specifies how many parallel chains to deploy for each simulation rep+case.

Finally, we have option `--local` for doing a test run before a batch run.

This python script executes `scripts/RunSimulationStudy.sh`, which runs the script to generate the necessary input for PhylEx, which is found in `scripts/GenerateInputForSimulatedStudy.R` before running PhylEx. Be sure to check these scripts and set the correct path to the executables depending on where you run them from and your installation path.

Example:
```
python RunSimulationStudy.py 123 simul/ --nchains 4 -m 2000 -p 2000
```


## Running other softwares
In the [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1), we have compared our method against [PhyloWGS](https://github.com/morrislab/phylowgs), [Canopy](https://github.com/yuchaojiang/Canopy), [ddClone](https://github.com/sohrabsa/ddclone), and [B-SCITE](https://github.com/smalikic/B-SCITE). The scripts are found under `scripts/misc/`.

## Contact
For questions, please email: sjun2@fredhutch.org. Please report bugs using Github issue.

Commit message:

Update reproducibility for HER2+ breast cancer. Adding NanoString PanCancer gene list file and the processed exon file needed for the analysis.

README.md, after:

# PhylExAnalysis

## Install PhylExR

We provide common functions used for data processing and analysis as an R package `PhylExR`. We recommend to install this package first.
From the command line,
```
R CMD build PhylExR
```
This command should create `PhylExR_1.0.tar.gz` file.
The following command will install the package.
```
R CMD install PhylExR_1.0.tar.gz
```

## Install PhylEx
Install dependencies for [PhylEx](https://github.com/junseonghwan/PhylEx).
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
cd PhylEx
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make install
```

## PhylEx input data

The bulk data has 5 columns separated by tabs: `ID`, `b`, `d`, `major_cn`, `minor_cn`.
The columns `b` and `d` are integer counts of the number of reads mapping to the variants and the total depth at a loci identified by `ID`.
If the data consists of multiple regions, the columns `b`, `d`, `major_cn`, `minor_cn` should contain the counts separated by comma.

The single cell data contains 4 columns: `ID`, `Cell`, `a`, `d`.
The `ID` column corresponds to the `ID` column in the bulk data file. The `Cell` column identifies the cell name/ID. The column `a` is the number of reads mapping to the reference allele at `ID` for cell `Cell` and `d` is the total number of reads mapping to the loci identified by `ID`.

Finally, there is a file containing the hyperparameters to be used in the inference. We recommend to auto-generate this file using the scripts provided (see the subsequent sections for details).

Example data files accepted by PhylEx are provided in `data/`. See for example, `data/HGSOC_bulk.txt`, `data/HGSOC_sc.txt`, and `data/HGSOC_sc_hp.txt`.

## Real biological data processing

We have provided scripts to help generate the input file and the configuration file needed to run PhylEx in this section.

### Bulk data

Relevant script:
- `Rscripts/PrepareBulkData.R`

We first processes the VCF file to generate the bulk data. An Rscript `Rscripts/PrepareBulkData.R` is provided as a reference. This script accepts three arguments: `VCF_PATH`, `CNV_PATH`, and `OUTPUT_PATH`. The `VCF_PATH` is the path to `.vcf` file generated from a variant caller such as MuTect2. The `CNV_PATH` is to the path containing the outputs of TitanCNA. We will look for the optimal copy number profile selected by TitanCNA in the path: `${CNV_PATH}/cna/results/titan/hmm/optimalClusterSolution.txt`.
This script outputs `bulk.txt` and `loci.txt`. 

### scRNA-data

Relevant scripts:
- `scripts/ProcessSingleCells.py`
- `scripts/ExtractReadCounts.sh`
- `scripts/ProcessSingleCellBAM.R`
- `Rscripts/CombineSingleCellData.R`

We assume that scRNA-seq data has been put through the standard pre-processing, i.e., alignment, procesing of UMI barcodes, etc, and are available as one BAM file for each cell. We have an Rscript that takes `loci.txt` outputted from the previous step and location to the scRNA-seq BAM files to extract the read data (`scripts/ProcessSingleCellBAM.R`). We recommend batch run this R script on all BAM files using `scripts/ProcessSingleCells.py`. Then, use `Rscripts/CombineSingleCellData.R` to generate `sc.txt` and `sc_hp.txt` file.

### Estimating the hyperparameters

Relevant scripts:
- `Rscripts/HGSOCEstimateHyperParams.R`

Generating the bulk and scRNA data files can be accomplished without the above scripts as long as the final data meets the format described above. In such a case, we recommend to generate the hyper parameter file for the single cell data by following the example provided in `Rscripts/HGSOCEstimateHyperParams.R`. Essentially, the function `PhylExR::EstimateHyperParameters` performs the task of estimating the hyperparameters from the scRNA-seq data.

## Running PhylEx

Relevant scripts:
- `scripts/RunInference.py`
- `scripts/RunInference.sh`

Once the input data are generated, we recommend to use a script to `scripts/RunInference.py`, which generates the configuration file and runs PhylEx.
We recommend to use 4 chains and the number of MCMC iterations should depend on the number of SNVs. 
As a point of reference, we used 20,000 iterations for HER2+ data, which had 432 SNVs and 369 cells and 10,000 iterations for HGSOC data, which had 67 SNVs and 360 cells.
In general, start with a smaller number of iterations and monitor the log likelihood.

**We plan to add a feature to start a run from a previous run to facilitate this process.**

<!-- ## Anlaysis

A script analyzing the ovarian cancer cell line data is provided in `Rscripts/HGSOC_SS3_Analysis.R`. It uses the expression matrix data deposited on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4533670) `HGSOC_fc.txt.zip`. We recommend to download and uncompress the file under `data/`.
 -->

## Reproducibility
The figures and tables presented in [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1) can be reproduced by the following steps.

1. Download the gene expression matrix files `HGSOC_fc.txt.zip` and `HER2_fc.txt.zip`from our [data repository](https://zenodo.org/record/4533670#.YMecUjZKg8Y) on Zenodo. Uncompress the files under `data/` where the input data files for PhylEx should be already available.
2. Download the results files `HGSOC_results.zip` and `HER2_results.zip`. Uncompress the files in `data/`, which should create directories `HGSOC_results` and `HER2_results`. These are the MAP trees outputted by running PhylEx.
    - The results can also be reproduced by running PhylEx by running `RunInference.py` script on the input data available in `data/` (see above). 
3. The phylo-phenotypic analysis for ovarian cancer cell-line data can be reproduced by running `Rscripts/HGSOC_SS3_Analysis.R`. The results for HER2+ cancer can be reproduced by running `Rscripts/HER2_DGE_NanoString.R`.
    - For HER2+ analysis, we downloaded [PanCancer pathway genes](https://www.nanostring.com/products/ncounter-assays-panels/panel-selection-tool/) to be downloaded from NanoString (Seattle, WA). 
    - It also requires exons, we have a pre-processed file available on `data/exons.bed`.

## Simulation data generation
The code for simulating the data is provided in the script: `scripts/SimulateData.py`.
The simulation options can be separated into three parts: 1) simulation conditions, 2) bulk data, 3) single cell data.

The simulation conditions are number of cells, number of replicates, tree size and minimum clone fraction:

- `-c`: Number of cells separated by comma. Default: `0,100,200,400`.
- `-r`: Number of replicates. Default: `20`.
- `-b`: Number of branches. Default: `2` for binary tree.
- `-d`: Depth of tree. Default: `3`.
- `-f`: Minimum clone fraction (cellular prevalence). Default: `0.05`.
- `--randomize_cf`: Randomize simulation of cellular fraction. Default: `0` for deterministical generation of cellular fraction where the cell fraction is halved at each node of the parent's remaining cellular fraction.
- `--randomize_branching`: Randomize the number of branches. Default: `0`. Setting this to `1` will randomly select the number of children for each node up to the value specified using `-d`.

The bulk data options control the number of SNVs, number of regions, and copy number simulation:

- `-s`: Number of sites (SNVs). Default: `100`.
- `-R`: Number of regions for simulating multi-regional bulk data. Default: `1` for single region.
- `--bulk_mean_depth`: The depth for the bulk data. Default: `1,000`.
- `-birth_rate`: Birth rate. Default: `0`.
- `-death_rate`: Death rate. Default: `0`.
- `-max_cn`: Maximum (total) copy number. Default: `10`.
- `-variant_cp_prob`: Probability of a copy being a variant. Default: `0.5`.
- `--var_clonal_cn_prob`: An alternative approach to generating copy number profiles. For variant copy number simulation. Default `0,1,0,0` for 1 copy of variant.
- `--ref_clonal_cn_prob`: An alternative approach to generating copy number profiles. For reference copy number simulation. Default `0,1,0,0` for 1 copy of reference copy.

The single cell data options are bursty probability controlling the probability of mono-allelic expression, dropout

- `--bursty_prob`: Probability of mono-allelic expression. Default: `0.8`.
- `--dropout_rate`: Number of sites to drop in the single cell expression. Default `0.8`, 80% of the number of sites will be dropped or 20% will be expressed.
- `--randomize_dropout`: Randomize dropout. The exact dropout rate will be randomly select from the value specified by `--dropout_rate` to `1`. Default: `1`.
- `--sc_mean_depth`: Mean depth for single cell data. Default: `20`.
- `--sc_bursty_alpha`: Hyperparameter $\alpha$ for mono-allelic distribution (Beta distribution). Default: `0.01`.
- `--sc_bursty_beta`: Hyperparameter $\beta$ for mono-allelic distribution (Beta distribution). Default: `0.01`.
- `--beta_binomial_hp_max`: The maximum value to use in quantifying the bi-allelic distribution across sites. Default: `10`.

There are options that relate to both the single cell and bulk data.
- `--snv_sc_sparsity`: The proportion of sites (SNVs) to have single cell coverage, specify a value int he range `[0, 1]`. Default: `1.0`, all sites are candidates to be covered. For a value below `1`, we will randomly select sites to never be expressed in the single cell simulation.
- `--seq_err`: The error probability for bulk data and for the error distribution of the single cell data. Default: `0.01`.

There is an option `--local` if it is specified, it will use the path to the executable under `PhylEx/simul`. If it is not specified, it uses an alternative path; you will need to modify `PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE` in the script to point to the correct path.

### Example

To simulate multifurcating tree with maximum of 4 branches and CN simulation with birth and death rates of `1` and `0.2` to be run locally, the below command can be used:
```
python scripts/SimulateData.py 123 simul/ -b 4 --randomize_branching 1 --birth_rate 1 --death_rate 0.2 --local 
```
The default values are used for the number of replicates (`20`), number of cells (`0,100,200,400`), and etc.

For binary tree,
```
python scripts/SimulateData.py 123 simul/ -b 2 --birth_rate 1 --death_rate 0.2 --local 
```

The simulated data generated using the script and analyzed in [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1) are deposited on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4533670).

### Running PhylEx on simulated data
The script `scripts/RunSimulationStudy.py` contains the code for batch running the simulation studies.
It assumes that there are 20 replicates and 4 cases involving the number of cells. To run simulation study for specific replicates, use the options `--rbegin` and `--rend`. And to run it for specific cases, use `--cbegin` and `--cend`.

The number of MCMC iterations for TSSB and MH iterations for sampling the cellular prevalences can be specified using the options `-m` and `-p`. The thinning and burn in can be controlled using `-t` and `-u`. The option `--nchains` specifies how many parallel chains to deploy for each simulation rep+case.

Finally, we have option `--local` for doing a test run before a batch run.

This python script executes `scripts/RunSimulationStudy.sh`, which runs the script to generate the necessary input for PhylEx, which is found in `scripts/GenerateInputForSimulatedStudy.R` before running PhylEx. Be sure to check these scripts and set the correct path to the executables depending on where you run them from and your installation path.

Example:
```
python RunSimulationStudy.py 123 simul/ --nchains 4 -m 2000 -p 2000
```


## Running other softwares
In the [PhylEx paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.02.16.431009v1), we have compared our method against [PhyloWGS](https://github.com/morrislab/phylowgs), [Canopy](https://github.com/yuchaojiang/Canopy), [ddClone](https://github.com/sohrabsa/ddclone), and [B-SCITE](https://github.com/smalikic/B-SCITE). The scripts are found under `scripts/misc/`.

## Contact
For questions, please email: sjun2@fredhutch.org. Please report bugs using Github issue.
